# Book summary: 'The brain that changes itself'

This book is about the property of brain where it changes itself under different conditions, known as neuroplasticity. This property stands against a traditional concept of localizationalism where it is believed that each part of brain has fixed and precise task. It is essentially a collection of medical success stories where neuroplasticity has been used to an advantage. This book is written by Norman Doidge, who is a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst. The book is very indeed gripping and consists of medical terms in perfect amount which can be understood by a common reader as well. 

The main **brain-y** quotes in the book are - 
* Use it or lose it.
* Neurons that fire together wire together. 

This book provides a reason to believe that human brain has great potential to grow, change, learn and recover from stressful situations as well as disabilities. However, it is true that critical period of childhood is essential to shape a human being, but no change is impossible. Also, habits can change a human to an unexpected extent. 

Following are some excerpts which I really liked about this book. 
* A brain system is made of many neuronal pathways, or neurons that are connected to one another and working together. If certain key pathways are blocked, then the brain uses older pathways to go around them. 
* When we print, we make each letter separately, with just a few pen movements, which is less demanding on the brain. In cursive we write several letters at a time, and the brain must process more complex movements.
* When "weak links in the chain" are strengthened, people gain access to skills whose development was formerly blocked, and they feel enormously liberated.
* For hundreds of years educators did seem to sense that children's brains had to be built up through exercises of increasing difficulty that strengthened brain functions. Up through the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries a classical education often included rote memorization of long poems in foreign languages, which strengthened the auditory memory (hence thinking in language) and an almost fanatical attention to handwriting, which probably helped strengthen motor capacities and thus not only helped handwriting but added speed and fluency to reading and speaking. Often a great deal of attention was paid to exact elocution and to perfecting the pronunciation of words. Then in the 1960s educators dropped such traditional exercises from the curriculum, because they were too rigid, boring, and "not relevant." But the loss of these drills has been costly; they may have been the only opportunity that many students had to systematically exercise the brain function that gives us fluency and grace with symbols, For the rest of us, their disappearance may have contributed to the general decline of eloquence, which requires memory and a level of auditory brainpower unfamiliar to us now. In the Lincoln-Douglas debates of 1858 the debaters would comfortably speak for an hour or more without notes, in extended memorized paragraphs; today many of the most learned among us, raised in our most elite schools since the 1960s, prefer the omnipresent PowerPoint presentation — the ultimate compensation for a weak premotor cortex. 
* Younger children often progress more quickly through brain exercises than do adolescents, perhaps because in an immature brain the number of connections among neurons, or synapses, is 50 percent greater than in the adult brain. When we reach adolescence, a massive "pruning back" operation begins in the brain, and synaptic connections and neurons that have not been used extensively suddenly die off — a classic case of "use it or lose it."
* Practicing a new skill, under the right conditions, can change hundreds of millions and possibly billions of the connections between the nerve cells in our brain maps.
* When a child learns to play piano scales for the first time, he tends to use his whole upper body — wrist, arm, shoulder — to play each note. Even the facial muscles tighten into a grimace. With practice the budding pianist stops using irrelevant muscles and soon uses only the correct finger to play the note. He develops a "lighter touch," and if he becomes skillful, he develops "grace" and relaxes when he plays. This is because the child goes from using a massive number of neurons to an appropriate few, well matched to the task
* This "reward" is a crucial feature of the program, because each time the child is rewarded, his brain secretes such neurotransmitters as dopamine and acetylcholine, which help consolidate the map changes he has just made. Dopamine reinforces the reward, and acetylcholine helps the brain "tune in" and sharpen memories.
* When we perform an activity that requires specific neurons to fire together, they release BDNF. This growth factor consolidates the connections between those neurons and helps to wire them together so they fire together reliably in the future. BDNF also promotes the growth of the thin fatty coat around every neuron that speeds up the transmission of electrical signals.
* A major reason memory loss occurs as we age is that we have trouble registering new events in our nervous systems, because processing speed slows down, so that the accuracy, strength, and sharpness with which we perceive declines. If you can't register something clearly, you won't be able to remember it well. 
* We still regard ourselves as active, but we have a tendency to deceive ourselves into thinking that we are learning as we were before. We rarely engage in tasks in which we must focus our attention as closely as we did when we were younger, trying to learn a new vocabulary or master new skills. Such activities as reading the newspaper, practicing a profession of many years, and speaking our own language are mostly the replay of mastered skills, not learning. That's why learning a new language in old age is so good for improving and maintaining the memory generally. Because it requires intense focus, studying a new language turns on the control system for plasticity and keeps it in good shape for laying down sharp memories of all kinds. 
* All of us have worries. We worry because we are intelligent beings. Intelligence predicts, that is its essence; the same intelligence that allows us to plan, hope, imagine, and hypothesize also allows us to worry and anticipate negative outcomes. 
* A famous indian neuroplastician V.S Ramachandran proved that when a part of the body is lost, he believes, its surviving brain map "hungers" for incoming stimulation and releases nerve growth factors that invite neurons from nearby maps to send little sprouts into them.
* Pain and body image are closely related. We always experience pain as projected into the body. When you throw your back out, you say, "My back is killing me!" and not, "My pain system is killing me." But as phantoms show, we don't need a body part or even pain receptors to feel pain. We need only a body image, produced by our brain maps. People with actual limbs don't usually realize this, because the body images of our limbs are perfectly projected onto our actual limbs, making it impossible to distinguish our body image from our body. "Your own body is a phantom," says Ramachandran, "one that your brain has constructed purely for convenience." 
* Understanding this tortoise-and-hare effect can help us understand what we must do to truly master new skills. After a brief period of practice, as when we cram for a test, it is relatively easy to improve because we are likely strengthening existing synaptic connections. But we quickly forget what we've crammed — because these are easy-come, easy-go neuronal connections and are rapidly reversed. Maintaining improvement and making a skill permanent require the slow steady work that probably forms new connections. If a learner thinks he is making no cumulative progress, or feels his mind is "like a sieve," he needs to keep at the skill until he gets "the Monday effect," which in Braille readers took six months. The Friday-Monday difference is probably why some people, the "tortoises," who seem slow to pick up a skill, may nevertheless learn it better than their "hare" friends — the "quick studies" who won't necessarily hold on to what they have learned without the sustained practice that solidifies the learning.
* One of the most advanced forms of mental practice is "mental chess," played without a board or pieces. The players imagine the board and the play, keeping track of the positions. Anatoly Sharansky, the Soviet human rights activist, used mental chess to survive in prison. . Political prisoners in isolation often fall apart mentally because the use-it-or-lose-it brain needs external stimulation to maintain its maps. During this extended period of sensory deprivation, Sharansky played mental chess for months on end, which probably helped him keep his brain from degrading. He played both white and black, holding the game in his head, from opposite perspectives — an extraordinary challenge to the brain. Sharansky once told me, half joking, that he kept at chess thinking he might as well use the opportunity to become the world champion. After he was released, with the help of Western pressure, he went to Israel and became a cabinet minister. When the world champion Garry Kasparov played against the prime minister and leaders of the cabinet, he beat all of them except Sharansky. 
* One reason we can change our brains simply by imagining is that, from a neuroscientific point of view, imagining an act and doing it are not as different as they sound. When people close their eyes and visualize a simple object, such as the letter a, the primary visual cortex lights up, just as it would if the subjects were actually looking at the letter a. Brain scans show that in action and imagination many of the same parts of the brain are activated. That is why visualizing can improve performance. 
* The system is plastic, not elastic," Pascual-Leone says in a booming voice. An elastic band can be stretched, but it always reverts to its former shape, and the molecules are not rearranged in the process. The plastic brain is perpetually altered by every encounter, every interaction.
* The first plastic concept Freud developed is the law that neurons that fire together wire together, usually called Hebb's law, though Freud proposed it in 1888, sixty years before Hebb. Freud stated that when two neurons fire simultaneously, this firing facilitates their ongoing association. Freud emphasized that what linked neurons was their firing together in time, and he called this phenomenon the law of association by simultaneity. 
* Free association is based on the understanding that all our mental associations, even seemingly "random" ones that appear to make no sense, are expressions of links formed in our memory networks. His law of association by simultaneity implicitly links changes in neuronal networks with changes in our memory networks, so that neurons that fired together years before wired together, and these original connections are often still in place and show up in a patient's free associations. 
* Grafman has identified four kinds of plasticity. The first is "map expansion," described above, which occurs largely at the boundaries between brain areas as a result of daily activity. The second is "sensory reassignment," which occurs when one sense is blocked, as in the blind. When the visual cortex is deprived of its normal inputs, it can receive new inputs from another sense, such as touch. The third is "compensatory masquerade," which takes advantage of the fact that there's more than one way for your brain to approach a task. Some people use visual landmarks to get from place to place. 
* The fourth kind of plasticity is "mirror region takeover." When part of one hemisphere fails, the mirror region in the opposite hemisphere adapts, taking over its mental function as best it can.

Please read the book if summary interests you. This book is worth your time. 
